custom_components/view_assist/docs/timers.md, before:

# Timers

The timer functionality is designed to handle timers, alarms, reminders and scheduled commands, managed via voice.

Upon expiration of the timer, an event is fired with the timer details.
Equally, prior to the expiration of the timer, an expiry warning event is fired to allow for a countdown to expiry.  This is default set at 10 seconds before but can be set in the `set_timer` service on timer creation.

The following services are available

## Set Timer

This service creates the timer and provides a response.

#### Service Name
view_assist.set_timer
#### Parameters
- `entity_id` (optional but must have this or device_id) - this is the entity id of the VA entity to tie the timer to
 - `device_id` (optional but must have this or entity_id) - this is the device id of the voice device which was passed in the sentence
 - `type` (required) - this is the type of timer (alarm, timer, reminder, command)
 - `name` (optional) - a name for the timer
 - `time` (required) - a time sentence - see below for examples of supported sentences
 - `extra` (optional) - accepts key/value pairs of any additional data to be stored with the timer and available in the timer info on the va entity attributes and in any timer events.

#### Service Response
Returns the timer data and a sentence that can be used for a conversation response that is the interpretation of the requested time.

```json
timer_id: 01JN6FGMRGJHXHSP9J7HKWK7VA
timer:
  entity_id: sensor.display_test
  timer_class: alarm
  timer_type: TimerInterval
  name: null
  expires: "2025-02-28T14:41:37"
  original_expiry: "2025-02-28T14:41:37"
  pre_expire_warning: 10
  expiry:
    seconds: 600
    interval:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
    day: Today
    time: 2:41:37 PM
    text: 10 minutes
  created_at: "2025-02-28T14:31:37"
  updated_at: "2025-02-28T14:31:37"
  status: running
  extra_info:
    sentence: 10 minutes
    timer_info:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
response: 10 minutes
```

## Cancel Timer
This service cancels 1 or more timers and provides a response to confirm if timers were cancelled.

#### Service Name
view_assist.cancel_timer
#### Parameters
 - `timer_id` (optional) - this is the id of the individual timer you wish to cancel
 - `entity_id  (optional) - the entity id of the VA sensor that the timers are attached to.  This will cancel all the timers for that VA entity
 - `device_id` (optional) - this is the device id of the voice device which was passed in when the timer was created.  This will cancel all timers for that device id.
 - `remove_all` (optional) - this will delete all timers

#### Response
```json
result: true
```

## Snooze Timer
This service snoozes an expired timer and reschedules it to fire again later.  It returns the updated timer if successful with the snooze information in the extra_info key.

#### Service Name
view_assist.snooze_timer
#### Parameters
 - `timer_id` (required) - this is the id of the individual timer you wish to cancel
 - `time` (required) - a time sentence - see below for examples of supported sentences

#### Response
```json
timer_id: 01JMWMYR7YQ1GVTT2TYBQM21Q6
timer:
  entity_id: sensor.display_test
  timer_class: timer
  timer_type: TimerInterval
  name: ""
  expires: "2025-02-24T19:04:57"
  original_expiry: "2025-02-24T18:54:28"
  pre_expire_warning: 10
  expiry:
    seconds: 600
    interval:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
    text: 10 minutes
  created_at: "2025-02-24T18:54:18"
  updated_at: "2025-02-24T18:54:57"
  status: snoozed
  extra_info:
    sentence: 10 seconds
    timer_info:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 0
      seconds: 10
    view_assist_entity_id: sensor.display_test
    snooze_duration:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
response: 10 minutes

```

## Get Timers
This service retrieves a list of timers.  With no parameters it will return all active timers

#### Service Name
view_assist.get_timers
#### Parameters
 - `timer_id` (optional) - this is the id of the individual timer you wish to view
 - `entity_id` (optional) - the entity id of the VA device.  This will return all timers for that VA device.
 - `device_id` (optional) - this is the device id of the voice device which was passed in when the timer was created.  This will return all timers for that device id.
 - `name` (optional) - the name of the timer.  This can be provided with an entity/device id or on its own.  If a timer id is supplied, it has no effect.
 - `include_expired` (optional) - this will include/exclude expired timers

#### Response
```json
result:
  - id: 01JMWK41PTEZ2JFKD9FSFERHRR
    entity_id: display.test
    timer_class: reminder
    timer_type: TimerTime
    name: do the chores
    expires: "2025-02-25T14:30:00"
    original_expiry: "2025-02-25T14:30:00"
    pre_expire_warning: 10
    expiry:
      seconds: 70612
      interval:
        days: 0
        hours: 19
        minutes: 36
        seconds: 52
      text: tomorrow at 2:30 PM
    created_at: "2025-02-24T18:22:14"
    updated_at: "2025-02-24T18:22:14"
    status: running
    extra_info:
      sentence: 14:30 tomorrow
      timer_info:
        day: tomorrow
        hour: 14
        minute: 30
        second: 0
        meridiem: ""
      view_assist_entity_id: sensor.display_test
  - id: 01JMWKVP7PXDZ38MD6CV62NYW3
    entity_id: display.test
    timer_class: alarm
    timer_type: TimerTime
    name: ""
    expires: "2025-02-25T23:30:00"
    original_expiry: "2025-02-25T23:30:00"
    pre_expire_warning: 10
    expiry:
      seconds: 103012
      interval:
        days: 1
        hours: 4
        minutes: 36
        seconds: 52
      text: tomorrow at 11:30 PM
    created_at: "2025-02-24T18:35:09"
    updated_at: "2025-02-24T18:35:09"
    status: running
    extra_info:
      sentence: 11:30 pm on tuesday
      timer_info:
        day: tuesday
        hour: 11
        minute: 30
        second: 0
        meridiem: pm
      view_assist_entity_id: sensor.display_test

```

## Events

The timer will raise an event for the following statuses:

- Timer Started

- Timer Cancelled

- Timer Warning

- Timer Expired

- Timer Snoozed

All event names are:

`va_timer_[action]` - for alarms, timers, reminders

or

`va_timer_command_[action]` - for command timers

where [action] is one of started, cancelled, warning, expired, snoozed

## Outstanding TODOs
- Create an expired timer clean up routine - they are currently only deleted by timer_cancel and restart of HA
- Allow setting of timer expiry warning event when setting timer

Commit message:

feat: variabilized english translation. Pending testing and further translations.

custom_components/view_assist/docs/timers.md, after:

# Timers

The timer functionality is designed to handle timers, alarms, reminders and scheduled commands, managed via voice.

Upon expiration of the timer, an event is fired with the timer details.
Equally, prior to the expiration of the timer, an expiry warning event is fired to allow for a countdown to expiry.  This is default set at 10 seconds before but can be set in the `set_timer` service on timer creation.

The following services are available

## Set Timer

This service creates the timer and provides a response.

#### Service Name
view_assist.set_timer
#### Parameters
- `entity_id` (optional but must have this or device_id) - this is the entity id of the VA entity to tie the timer to
 - `device_id` (optional but must have this or entity_id) - this is the device id of the voice device which was passed in the sentence
 - `type` (required) - this is the type of timer (alarm, timer, reminder, command)
 - `name` (optional) - a name for the timer
 - `time` (required) - a time sentence - see below for examples of supported sentences
 - `extra` (optional) - accepts key/value pairs of any additional data to be stored with the timer and available in the timer info on the va entity attributes and in any timer events.

#### Service Response
Returns the timer data and a sentence that can be used for a conversation response that is the interpretation of the requested time.

```json
timer_id: 01JN6FGMRGJHXHSP9J7HKWK7VA
timer:
  entity_id: sensor.display_test
  timer_class: alarm
  timer_type: TimerInterval
  name: null
  expires: "2025-02-28T14:41:37"
  original_expiry: "2025-02-28T14:41:37"
  pre_expire_warning: 10
  expiry:
    seconds: 600
    interval:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
    day: Today
    time: 2:41:37 PM
    text: 10 minutes
  created_at: "2025-02-28T14:31:37"
  updated_at: "2025-02-28T14:31:37"
  status: running
  extra_info:
    sentence: 10 minutes
    timer_info:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
response: 10 minutes
```

## Cancel Timer
This service cancels 1 or more timers and provides a response to confirm if timers were cancelled.

#### Service Name
view_assist.cancel_timer
#### Parameters
 - `timer_id` (optional) - this is the id of the individual timer you wish to cancel
 - `entity_id  (optional) - the entity id of the VA sensor that the timers are attached to.  This will cancel all the timers for that VA entity
 - `device_id` (optional) - this is the device id of the voice device which was passed in when the timer was created.  This will cancel all timers for that device id.
 - `remove_all` (optional) - this will delete all timers

#### Response
```json
result: true
```

## Snooze Timer
This service snoozes an expired timer and reschedules it to fire again later.  It returns the updated timer if successful with the snooze information in the extra_info key.

#### Service Name
view_assist.snooze_timer
#### Parameters
 - `timer_id` (required) - this is the id of the individual timer you wish to cancel
 - `time` (required) - a time sentence - see below for examples of supported sentences

#### Response
```json
timer_id: 01JMWMYR7YQ1GVTT2TYBQM21Q6
timer:
  entity_id: sensor.display_test
  timer_class: timer
  timer_type: TimerInterval
  name: ""
  expires: "2025-02-24T19:04:57"
  original_expiry: "2025-02-24T18:54:28"
  pre_expire_warning: 10
  expiry:
    seconds: 600
    interval:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
    text: 10 minutes
  created_at: "2025-02-24T18:54:18"
  updated_at: "2025-02-24T18:54:57"
  status: snoozed
  extra_info:
    sentence: 10 seconds
    timer_info:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 0
      seconds: 10
    view_assist_entity_id: sensor.display_test
    snooze_duration:
      days: 0
      hours: 0
      minutes: 10
      seconds: 0
response: 10 minutes

```

## Get Timers
This service retrieves a list of timers.  With no parameters it will return all active timers

#### Service Name
view_assist.get_timers
#### Parameters
 - `timer_id` (optional) - this is the id of the individual timer you wish to view
 - `entity_id` (optional) - the entity id of the VA device.  This will return all timers for that VA device.
 - `device_id` (optional) - this is the device id of the voice device which was passed in when the timer was created.  This will return all timers for that device id.
 - `name` (optional) - the name of the timer.  This can be provided with an entity/device id or on its own.  If a timer id is supplied, it has no effect.
 - `include_expired` (optional) - this will include/exclude expired timers

#### Response
```json
result:
  - id: 01JMWK41PTEZ2JFKD9FSFERHRR
    entity_id: display.test
    timer_class: reminder
    timer_type: TimerTime
    name: do the chores
    expires: "2025-02-25T14:30:00"
    original_expiry: "2025-02-25T14:30:00"
    pre_expire_warning: 10
    expiry:
      seconds: 70612
      interval:
        days: 0
        hours: 19
        minutes: 36
        seconds: 52
      text: tomorrow at 2:30 PM
    created_at: "2025-02-24T18:22:14"
    updated_at: "2025-02-24T18:22:14"
    status: running
    extra_info:
      sentence: 14:30 tomorrow
      timer_info:
        day: tomorrow
        hour: 14
        minute: 30
        second: 0
        meridiem: ""
      view_assist_entity_id: sensor.display_test
  - id: 01JMWKVP7PXDZ38MD6CV62NYW3
    entity_id: display.test
    timer_class: alarm
    timer_type: TimerTime
    name: ""
    expires: "2025-02-25T23:30:00"
    original_expiry: "2025-02-25T23:30:00"
    pre_expire_warning: 10
    expiry:
      seconds: 103012
      interval:
        days: 1
        hours: 4
        minutes: 36
        seconds: 52
      text: tomorrow at 11:30 PM
    created_at: "2025-02-24T18:35:09"
    updated_at: "2025-02-24T18:35:09"
    status: running
    extra_info:
      sentence: 11:30 pm on tuesday
      timer_info:
        day: tuesday
        hour: 11
        minute: 30
        second: 0
        meridiem: pm
      view_assist_entity_id: sensor.display_test

```

## Events

The timer will raise an event for the following statuses:

- Timer Started

- Timer Cancelled

- Timer Warning

- Timer Expired

- Timer Snoozed

All event names are:

`va_timer_[action]` - for alarms, timers, reminders

or

`va_timer_command_[action]` - for command timers

where [action] is one of started, cancelled, warning, expired, snoozed

## Translation Instructions:
1. Copy the file [timers_english.py](../translations/timers/timers_english.py) and rename it to the language you want to translate to.
2. Translate the text in the file to your language. Please be careful to not change the name of the variables. There are three types of sections:
    - Needs Translation: These are word and phrases that need to be translated.
    - Might Need Translation: These are words and phrases that might need to be translated. They use words from the previous section to form sentences. If they make sense in your language, you can leave them as is.
    - Likely no translation: These are words and phrases that are likely to be the same in your language, since they refer to fixed intervals of time. You can leave them as is.
3. Import the translation file into [timers.py](../timers.py) and add the language to the list of supported languages (involves updating all level top level dicts).
    - Also update the `TimerLanguage` class with your new language code.
4. Update Tests 
    - Import the translation file into [test_timers_all_languages.py](../tests/test_timers_all_languages.py) and add the language to the list of supported languages (involves updating all level top level dicts).
    - Duplicate the [test_timers_en.py](../tests/test_timers_en.py) file and rename it to the language you want to test.
    - Run tests to confirm things work as expected.
5. Update the language field in the [services.yaml](../services.yaml) file with the language code you added.
6. Move code to your Home Assistant custom component directory and test it out.

## Outstanding TODOs
- Create an expired timer clean up routine - they are currently only deleted by timer_cancel and restart of HA
- Allow setting of timer expiry warning event when setting timer
